---
title: "Creativity"
date: "2025-07-18"
type: "Essay"
color: "blue"
---
Finally! After weeks of going to sleep dreaming about this moment, after countless tutorials and guides online, after tasting the temptation of the satisfaction of completion on the tip of my tongue, at last, I am finished. In spring it's a cloud painting I've started over 8 times. In winter it's a short story about a monkey I can never get right. All summer and fall are spent on the hacky idea of building artistic websites, whatever that means. I pick up and drop creative projects like a drug addict looking for that first high, but it never comes (if it ever did at all). Here's the thing. Creativity, for me, isn't a beautiful outlet of self-expression or a divine commune with the mystery of the world. I would prefer to just read nonfiction and learn about the real world if I'm being honest. But if I don't create, I will die. I create so I can survive long enough to do what really matters. 

Why do I value cold hard facts over the beauty that comes from creative expression? I think it's because I live in the cold, hard real world. I can't afford one of those immersive VR headsets so for now I'm stuck here, and so are you. So partly, creativity is a distratction from what's real. Sure, you may argue that a well-written novel or play actually offers us deep psychological insight into the human condition and other things which are all very real, plus it's much more engaging. To that I say, what hubris! What ego! To think you or anyone else can capture the essence of reality. I will grant you it is more engaging, because it is nothing but entertainment, pure and simple. All creatives are nothing more than sleezy reality TV producers, twisting and cutting reality until they can present the most entertaining angle to the world as if it is the unbiased truth. 

The real world is much much different than any novel or screenplay. It is mostly empty space. Most people's lives are plotless. Things happen and they can't be explained and you never find out the reason. That's life. Creativity is a wasteful at best, harmful at worst endeavor because one must always collide head-first with reality as it truly is. Think of the teenager who consumes romance novels and movies like candy. Will their life be better or worse when they enter the romantic arena with the pimply teenage boys who are carrying, on their end, the crude expectations of yet another creative art form i.e. pornography? Who benefits from those false realities and, by extension, the false expectations that they feed into the psyches of our youth? I'll tell you. We all do. We all benefit from it the same way we benefit from candy or heroin. We just can't stop ourselves.

If creativity is a wasteful endeavor, what is worthy of our time? I believe simply that we should spend our time thinking and learning about the world we actually live in. And I submit further, despite how grouchy and cantankerous I may sound, that when you really commit yourself to learning the truth as it really is, beneath the cold, hard surface of this reality lies something far more warm and effervescent than you or any sleezy reality TV show producer or, to state the same subject a second and a third time, a novelist or film director could ever dream of. The best part: glimpsing the beautiful complexity of reality is not a short-term pleasure. It doesn't give you cavities or naive expectations. It is stable, because it is true. The social worker who spends hours each day speaking with the disadvantaged youth and adults our society has spit out reads multiple novels more truthful and compelling than anything any author has ever produced. The scientist who studies the universe of atoms and molecules beneath the back of our very hands pierces the mundane to find the marvelous much more than any act of creativity. Don't misread my words, every act of intelligence requires imagination. But imagination in service of understanding reality is noble, while imagination in service of entertaining one's ego is a waste.

After I finish writing these words will I go volunteer at a suicide hotline or pull out a microsocope and attempt to do some chemistry? I should. That would be the right thing. But it's far more likely that I will pull out my paints, or imagine what vocablulary monkeys would use if they could speak english, or find a new pretty pastelle to use on my website. I, like you, am addicted. I can't help it. I have to create in order to live. There's a reason people eat candy or shoot up heroin though, and right now, before the inevitable come down arrives, it feels pretty good. 