---
title: "Guilt"
date: "2025-07-24"
type: "Log"
color: "red"
---

I had a dream last night I was at a concert with my friends. The band was playing on the stage and I was off to the side. A big group of 20 or so of my friends took off their shoes and started dancing in the grass in front of the stage. Eventually, I joined them. We were all completely absorbed by the music, as if our hearts were synchronized with the rhythm itself. I wasn't thinking about anything else but the joy I was experiencing and the soft, cold grass on my feet. "Every day could be like this" some voice spoke to me before I woke up.

In my waking life I'm constantly plagued by something like a guilt for existing happily. Perhaps it sounds trite, but to me it's the absolute truth: all over the Earth at this very moment are weeping mothers and terrified children. Their lives are miserable. They are hungry or scared or both. And despite how easy it is to cast your attention elsewhere, especially when you are surrounded by such luxury as many of us are, they are still there, suffering silently, lost in the abyss, drowning in sorrow. I can't shake the feeling that somehow *I am responsible* if I don't do anything to help them. Anytime I am not suffering myself, the question of how any of us can possibly fall asleep at night whilst this is occurring hovers over me like a dark shadow.

The following passage from Albert Camus' *The Plague* captures this insight (or perhaps you may prefer "feeling") perfectly:

> For many years I've been ashamed, mortally ashamed, of having been, even with the best intentions, even at many removes, a murderer in my turn. As time went on I merely learned that even those who were better than the rest could not keep themselves nowadays from killing or letting others kill, because such is the logic by which they live; and that we can't stir a finger in this world without the risk of bringing death to somebody. Yes, I've been ashamed ever since; I have realized that we all have plague, and I have lost my peace. And today I am still trying to find it; still trying to understand all those others and not to be the mortal enemy of anyone. I only know that one must do what one can to cease being plague-stricken, and that's the only way in which we can hope for some peace or, failing that, a decent death. This, and only this, can bring relief to men and, if not save them, at least do them the least harm possible and even, sometimes, a little good. So that is why I resolved to have no truck with anything which, directly or indirectly, for good reasons or for bad, brings death to anyone or justifies others' putting him to death... **each of us has the plague within him; no one, no one on earth is free from it.** 

I'm willing to concede that thinking in this way is a psychological aberration one should try one's best to avoid. All the same, doing so does not get rid of it inside of me and any attempt to do so feels like an attempt to care less about others which a part of me cannot seem to swallow. In this way, I am almost grateful for suffering in my own life, perhaps I even sometimes seek it out, for at least then I can convince myself I am innocent.

There is one other relief from this guilt I have only ever glimpsed in patches here and there. I can't imagine how this sounds to someone else, but I can only write what I feel is true and if it sounds performative or fake I can't control that: The only thing I seem to care more about than others' suffering is the truth itself. That's not an attempt to make myself sound good. I don't percieve it as anything noble. That's just the way my values turned out to be. If someone else values others' suffering over the truth or their own pleasure over both I have no inclination to criticize them. If anything, I feel a little jealous. They are, likely, psychologically healthy. In my own head, however, the only time that dark shadow ceases is when I perceive myself as going after the truth. That could mean learning facts about the world but more often than not it manifests itself as experiencing the truth of this moment. And this moment. And then this moment. When I'm completely absorbed in the moment like that, aware that I am observing it as a manifestation of the Truth with a capital T, the guilt vanishes. In these moments I sometimes try to remind myself of those suffering all across the world to see if the guilt comes back but that fact of others' suffering only appears next to all other facts as equally beautiful. Is that possible? Can suffering be beautiful? All I know is that in these moments, for better or for worse, something somewhere deep inside of me allows me to perceive everything, even suffering, with love.

> Once they were on the pier they saw the sea spread out before them, a gently heaving expanse of deep-piled velvet, supple and sleek as a creature of the wild. They sat down on a boulder facing the open. Slowly the waters rose and sank, and with their tranquil breathing sudden oily glints formed and flickered over the surface in a haze of broken lights. Before them the darkness stretched out into infinity. Rieux could feel under his hand the gnarled, weather-worn visage of the rocks, and a strange happiness possessed him. Turning to Tarrou, he caught a glimpse of his friend's face of the same happiness, a happiness that forgot nothing, not even murder."